Title: Investigating the genetic basis of nodulation via chemical mutagenesis
screening and natural diversity panel mining in Pisum sativum

Motivation: Nodulation mechanisms and pathways are well established in Medicago
truncatula, the most deeply studied plant in the nitrogen fixing clade from a
modern reverse genetics perspective, but not only are shoot phenotypes difficult
to categorise, Medicago is far from being put to use in an agricultural setting.
To this end, it is of significant interest to elucidate nodulation pathways in
Pisum sativum (garden pea). LSH1/2 - factors typically implicated as shoot
phenotype regulators - have recently been identified in the context of nodulation
(cite: lee2024light). One working evolutionary theory is that more general
regulatory programmes have been recently co-opted by root nodulation systems, and
the well segregating traits in Pisum sativum will hopefully help push the envelope
in this regard.

The Work: Three resources were made available through collaborators - a natural
pea diversity germplasm dataset along with ~30x short read paired end genome
sequencing data via the John Innes Centre (JIC) (cite: feng2025genomic), an ethyl
methanesulfonate (EMS) chemical mutagenesis panel in the "JI2822" pea background
also via the JIC (unpublished), and finally a fast neutron (FN) mutagenesis panel,
also in the JI2822 pea background (unpublished). EMS alkylates guanine residues,
causing G/C-to-A/T transition SNPs genome-wide, while fast neutron irradiation
induces double-strand breaks that are repaired imprecisely, resulting
predominantly in deletions and other structural indels.  Our challenge was to
figure out a way to unify these resources in our goal of establishing Pisum
sativum as a tractable genetic model for dissecting the molecular basis of
nodulation.

Screening: Given that Pisum sativum has n genes and a genome size of x, given that
the EMS mutations have an expected rate of y, we would expect roughly 10
G/C-to-A/T mutations in a given gene across the entire panel of mutants.During the
screening of the EMS mutagenesis panel, we recorded qualitative shoot (internode
length, height, leaf size, stipule size, petiole length, peduncle length) and root
characteristics (nodule abundance, nodule morphology, root density, root
complexity, nodule size) of <NUMBER> plants. In addition, we also recorded how
interesting a given accession was in terms of its overall characteristics (i.e.,
whether or not to request seeds for further investigation under controlled
conditions). The exact combinations of characteristics that determined how
interesting an accession was were flexible, but in general we were looking out for
unusual nodule morphologies or hypernodulation, particularly when combined with
unusual root morphology (extremely low complexity roots, for example) and unusual
shoot morphology (e.g. unusually short, large features, serrations on the leaves).
Plants without nodules might have been considered interesting under controlled
conditions, but as the plants had been grown in a greenhouse with no <single known
strain of rhizobia, there's a term for this but I forgot it...> and were in
various stages of decay during the screening, it was not possible to distinguish
those that had no nodules due to a genetic factor or due to the nodules having
disintegrated, enough nitrogen been available in the compost that nodules did not
need to be produced, or those that were not colonised by the correct bacteria.
TODO: summary statistics

Controlled Conditions: Seeds from n accessions flagged during a primary
greenhouse screen conducted by other members of the lab were germinated and
cultivated under controlled conditions across three separate growth batches.
Prior to germination, seeds were surface-sterilised as follows: immersion in 70%
EtOH for 1 minute, one rinse with distilled water for 1 minute, immersion in 2%
NaOCl for 5 minutes, three 1-minute washes with distilled water, and two final
washes with distilled water with a minimum 20-minute imbibition period.
Following this they were planted in clear 1 litre plastic pots without drainage
holes containing 1:1 vermiculite/terragreen substrate watered with x ml of
nitrogen free rooting solution (TODO: write out the recipe or at least cite it),
inoculated with 1ml of rhizobia culture (rhizobia binomial name and
modifications, they had GUS constructs) and were wrapped in cling film and left
to grow in <growth chamber conditions> for a total of 28 days. The cling film
was cut open as soon as the seedlings germinated and distilled water was added
as necessary if the substrate became too dry. After 28 days, the plants were
removed from the pots and the roots washed, before the plants were phenotyped
(weight, shoot and root characteristics as before, and height) and a
representative sample of the root system taken for histochemical staining and
finally were repotted in 1:1 vermiculite/F2 compost to set seed.

In general, the vast majority of the flagged seeds collected in the EMS
screening were wild type in appearance, with a few exceptions. This was somewhat
surprising, as the phenotypes recorded during the screening were in many cases
quite dramatic (large, multilobed clusters and/or hypernodulating root systems),
but certainly the fact that the full EMS population was not grown under
conditions conducive to accurate nodule phenotyping (monoculture of rhizobia,
different substrate, etc) will have contributed to this difference in phenotype.
One fairly easy to test hypothesis was considered - that the increase in root
density as the plants grew to fill their small pots may have both reduced
nutrient availability and compressed the surrounding earth to trigger nodulation
and induce non-wild-type phenotypes. To test this, we grew the pea cultiva Avola
in both non-compressed and compressed 1:1 F2/vermiculite mix, our standard
nodulation assay 1:1 terragreen/vermiculite mix and finally sharp sand, to
understand whether substrate had an effect on nodule morphology. The seeds were
sterilised and inoculated as described for the other planting experiments.



Hairy Root Transformation: To assess the feasibility of hairy root
transformation as a tool for functional characterisation of LSH1 and LSH2
in P. sativum, transformation of P. sativum cv. Avola was attempted
following the protocol of Leppyanen et al. (2019) (cite:
leppyanen2019agrobacterium). The JI2822 background used for the EMS and FN
panels was reported by collaborators at the JIC to be recalcitrant to
transformation, including by hairy root approaches; cv. Avola was therefore
selected as a more tractable starting point. Three A. rhizogenes strains
(AR1193, ARqua1,
and K599) were evaluated with a reporter-only construct carrying DsRed
under the Lotus japonicus ubiquitin promoter (pLjUBI::DsRed), with n = 10
plants per strain. Concurrently, ~18 plants each were transformed with
constructs additionally carrying LSH1 or LSH2 (pLjUBI::DsRed-LSH1 and
pLjUBI::DsRed-LSH2), intended to generate overexpressor composite plants.
Briefly, etiolated seedlings were germinated in barley nodulation medium
(BNM; cite: wickens2026spatiotemporal) in a ventilated tip box (Figure Xa), sectioned in the
hypocotyl region, and wounded root tips were inoculated by contact with A.
rhizogenes growing on plate. Seedlings were then supported through
windmill-folded filter paper in glass jars containing modified Fahraeus
(modFP) agar, without antibiotic selection, and incubated for 10-14 days
at 21°C under a 16h/8h light/dark cycle (Figure Xb-d). A total of six DsRed-expressing hairy roots were recovered: four from K599,
one from AR1193, and one from ARqua1 (Figure Xd; dsred_avola_hairy_roots.jpeg). All successful transformants
carried the reporter-only construct (pLjUBI::DsRed), suggesting that hairy root
transformation is feasible in cv. Avola, though transformation efficiency
appeared to remain low and require further optimisation.
In contrast, the LSH overexpressor which used the AR1193 strain in fact achieved
transformation efficiency of 16/18 and 14/18 for the LSH1 and LSH2 overexpressor
constructs, respectively.
While the transformed roots were still mostly in early stages of growth (see
hairy_root_lsh1oe_v2.png, hairy_root_lsh2oe_v2.png), the LSH2
overexpressor line showed a distinct "curled" root phenotype (curly_lsh2oe.jpg)
consistent with observations of lsh1 lsh2 double knockouts <note, should be more
accurate with knockout syntax here> in medicago (lee2024light).
7 lines with the LSH2 overexpressor construct and 5 lines with the LSH1
overexpressor construct were taken forward for attempted stable line cultivation
by surgically removing transformed calli to T -BASTA agar to promote
hormone-mediated re-differentiation, meanwhile 7 lines with the LSH2
overexpressor and 11 lines with the LSH1 overexpressor were kept to grow in
500ml pots in 1:1 terragreen/vermiculite mix supplemented with ~100ml ModFP
medium along with the 6 successfully transformed dsred control plants

Figure Legends:

hairy_root_lsh2oe_v2.png — Figure [LSH2oe]. Brightfield and fluorescence
imaging of pLjUBI::DsRed-LSH2 transformed hairy roots in P. sativum cv.
Avola (line 43224). (A–C) Brightfield stereomicroscopy images of three
independent transformed hairy roots recovered following A. rhizogenes
(AR1193) inoculation. (D–F) Corresponding DsRed fluorescence images
confirming stable transgene expression throughout the root tissue. A
pronounced curled root morphology is visible in panels C and F, consistent
with the phenotype observed in lsh1 lsh2 overexpressor lines in M.
truncatula (lee2024light).

hairy_root_lsh1oe_v2.png — Figure [LSH1oe]. Brightfield and fluorescence
imaging of pLjUBI::DsRed-LSH1 transformed hairy roots in P. sativum cv.
Avola (line 43225). (A–C) Brightfield stereomicroscopy images of three
representative transformed hairy roots recovered following A. rhizogenes
(AR1193) inoculation. (D–F) Corresponding DsRed fluorescence images
confirming stable transgene expression.

there is a lot of diversity out there - induced and natural. We are both looking
for diversity in our genes of interest but additionally novel regulators that we
    might not have considered yet.


TODO: look for fast neutron indels in gene body and 5kb upstream of start site
mendelseq: look at LSH1/2, NOOT1/2, NIN, NFYa1 and recommend accessions to
investigate this

Methods:

Identification of Pisum sativum nodulation gene orthologs:

A curated genelist of nodulation-relevant genes was compiled from the
Medicago truncatula A17 (v5r1.7) annotation, comprising genes with
established or candidate roles in nodulation signalling, organogenesis, and
regulation, including LSH1, LSH2, NOOT1, NOOT2, NF-YA1, and related family
members. For each A17 gene, a corresponding R108 ortholog had been manually
curated from the M. truncatula R108 HiC assembly
(medtr.R108.gnmHiC_1.ann1; cited as R108 throughout) annotation, stored
as the R108_orthologs_final field in the genelist.

To identify Pisum sativum JI2822 orthologs, OrthoFinder (cite: emms2019orthofinder) was run on predicted protein
sequences from all three species: M. truncatula A17, M. truncatula R108,
and P. sativum JI2822.

Pisum orthologs were identified using a two-step bridging strategy via R108:
for each gene in the genelist, the pre-curated R108 ortholog ID was used to
look up its OrthoFinder orthogroup, and all Pisum sativum JI2822 proteins
within that orthogroup were extracted as candidate orthologs. This was
supplemented with pairwise R108-to-Pisum ortholog assignments from the
OrthoFinder pairwise Orthologues output. R108 was used as an intermediary
rather than mapping directly from A17, as the genelist R108 identifiers were
directly compatible with the OrthoFinder output, and the HiC-improved R108
assembly is expected to have higher-quality gene models that resolve more
reliably to Pisum orthologs. Orthogroups containing exactly one gene from
each species (1:1:1 single-copy orthogroups) were flagged as highest-
confidence assignments. The resulting Pisum locus IDs (PSAT_LOCUS identifiers) were mapped to
genomic coordinates in the JI2822 v1.3 assembly. The full pipeline is
implemented in the script find_orthologs.py.

Fast neutron indel intersection:

FN deletion and duplication calls (n = 1,603 deletions and 451 duplications
across 197 FN lines) were obtained from skim-sequencing coverage analysis of
the JI2822 FN panel (Supplementary Tables 5-6, collaborator-provided).
Deletions were called at two stringency thresholds per line: a hemizygous
call (coverage ~50% of genome average, marking the outer interval of coverage
loss) and a homozygous call (coverage ~0%, the inner high-confidence core).
These were intersected with the 488 ortholog gene models in JI2822 coordinates
using a minimum 1 bp overlap criterion. All analysis was performed using the script fn_ortholog_analysis.py.

Comparing GUS staining methods to optimise for Pisum Sativum nodules.  Three
approaches were trialled - 8h incubation/9m infiltration, 12h/15m infiltration,
18h/15m infiltration

The 8h incubation gave the most accurate view of fully colonised mature nodules
(mature_nodules_batch1.jpg), but many early stage nodules and infection threads
were not visibly stained or were barely stained (early_nodules_batch1.jpg), and so
further investigation under the microscope was made difficult. The 18h/15m
infiltration gave incredibly detailed views of infection threads and early
rhizobium colonisation events in general (infection_thread_detail_batch2.jpg) but
overstained fully mature nodules (mature_nodules_batch2.jpg), while the 12h/15m
incubation/infiltration approach gave a good combination of both features
(infection_thread_detail_batch3.jpg, mature_nodules_batch3.jpg) with the exception
of some slight overstaining in the mature nodules.

To insert somewhere:

- Many genes which coordinate nodulation are ubiquitous plant genes, involved in
  general root growth/arbuscular mycorrhiza symbiosis but are
  likely co-opted by nitrogen fixing plants either through modification,
  duplication or nodule-specific regulation (yu2024conserved)

TODO/NOTES:

- Should note somewhere that it's quite easy to observe infection threads and
  early stage nodules in pea compared with medicago due to their size,
  especially with more pronounced GUS staining
- Do we see the NIN motifs found in the NAD1 paper? (yu2024conserved)
